This is Deborah Beale interviewing Mr. Don Feltz
on the history of the Texas Engineering
Experiment Station. The date is June 14, 1984.
Okay, that looks like that is working now. Okay,
now how you came to A&M? Okay, your question was how
did I get associated with A&M. Okay, I was first a
student here in 1951, and stayed here two years
until I was drafted into the Army because of the
Korean War, and then I did not get back to A&M until
1957. I continued my studies toward a degree in
mechanical engineering. And then that was
followed by my immediate entry into graduate
school as a nuclear engineer. At the time I
graduated in mechanical engineering, the
nuclear engineering department had actually not
been founded. We were taking nuclear engineering
courses, but they were being offered through the
Department of Mechanical Engineering. And
shortly thereafter, I'd say in 1960 or so, they
formed the Nuclear Engineering Department. And
that's when they brought Dr. Cochran here, not
only to head up nuclear engineering, but also to be
head of the Nuclear Science Center, which at that
time was in its design phase.
The studies and proposals for funding from the
National Science Foundation the Department of
Energy had all been completed and the design work
started on the Science Center in 59. About the time
I was finishing up my undergraduate work in
mechanical engineering. So, shortly after I got
into the nuclear engineering course work, I took
an assistantship where I was assigned to the
Nuclear Science Center We were housed on campus in
the old highway research building, which is
across the street from the, uh, petroleum
engineering, the, uh, Girardi building. And we
were, at that time, when I joined the science
center, they'd already started excavation, all
the construction. So I continued, uh, with my
graduate studies, working as a half-time
research assistant, or student assistant.
Proper term, I guess, is graduate assistant. Get
it right in a minute. And I stayed in that capacity
until 1963, when I completed my studies. And then I
became full-time employed at the Science Center
as reactor supervisor. And two years after that,
the administration changed at the Science
Center. Dr. Cochran
was
put back, say, only in charge of the engineering
department, and they brought a director to the
Science Center, changed the title from head to
director, and that was Dr. John Randall. And I was
named the assistant at that time, in 1965. So I've
had just about all the jobs that are available out
here since that time. And then later, I was named
the associate director to the center.
When you first started studying nuclear science,
Were you pretty sure they were going to get the
funding and everything to establish the center?
Oh, yes. Yeah, we had the funding in hand when I
started. That work was done by, mainly by Dr. Dick
Winerdi, Rich Winerdi, and Dr. Calhoun. They were
responsible for putting the package together,
the proposals, to get the funding for the center.
There were several things at that time that the
university wanted to get into for the advancement
of engineering and science. One was a data
processing center. One was a nuclear science
center, which both became reality. These were all
in the era of Dr. Calhoun and Dean Benson and Dr.
Wernherde. At the time, Dr. Wernherde was His
responsibility was gathering the information
for the proposals and getting something started
in the nuclear engineering as far as the reactor
was concerned, too. Of course, we were placed from
the very beginning under the Tees. As far as Tees
administration, I remember only Dean Benson. The
previous director, I did not know that well, but
there was a little crossover there, I think, when I
was one of the graduate assistants. I think my
first Form 500 was actually signed by Dr. Rose. So,
if I'm not making an error, I think Dean Benson must
have taken the directorship of Tees about that
time. So I was pretty close there because I did
start in 59. So you have to obviously mention Dr.
Rose as far as the development of the nuclear
science center. Because it actually started, it
was a deputy under study while he was still
director of the team. Do you know who instigated
the whole idea of the nuclear science center? I
would think it would be Dr. Calhoun from
discussions with him since that time. I think it
was his idea to bring Dr. Wernherdi to Texas A&M
with the specific assignment to put together the
proposal to get the funding for this center. Now
there was a mini reactor or something before. Yes,
at the time. I started my studies in nuclear
engineering. There was a small reactor placed in
the mechanical engineering shops. It was called
an AGN 201 reactor, and Dr. Randall, who was not a
doctor at the time, but John Randall, came to Texas
A&M in perhaps 59, late 58, to put that reactor in.
It's a training reactor. It's still here at Texas
A&M. It's located now in the basement of Zachary.
It's associated with the Department of Nuclear
Engineering. It's a very low-power reactor used
in training, training for engineering students
or reactor operators. It does have some research
capabilities, but they're quite limited because
of the what we consider the low power of the
reactor. It's the type of machine that if the
operator makes an error, it shuts down very
quickly. He must maintain the instruments within
full range of the capability of each instrument.
If he goes off scale, either on the high end or off
the bottom end of the scale, he's going to lose the
reactor. It's going to shut down on him. So he has to
be very careful to make sure the instruments stay
on the proper scales. And there's one reason it's
called training reactor. You're spending a lot of
time paying attention to the controls. Now that
was moved, by the way, when Zachary was built. They
moved the reactor from the shops into the Zachary
Center, the engineering center. It's now
associated with the Department of Nuclear
Engineering complex they have there. It's on a
different level than the classrooms.
There's a large laboratory associated above the
reactor as well as you can work around the reactor
itself.
It's quite large in size as far as the facility
compared to the space we had over in the ME shops. We
were just more or less placed in the corner of that
large building and then a separate little
building was built around it.
They were doing mostly biological radiation
studies? Not with that reactor, no. That reactor
was used mainly in the class instruction lab work
for nuclear engineering students. When did TWU
have Grant come to use it for bone research or
something? The 201? I'm not familiar with that.
That must not have happened when I was there. Maybe
later. When did they, I've seen pictures of the,
all the rat research and the exposure of the rats.
Was that once the complex was created? Well, the
exposure of those animals, I can recall two ways
they were done. Dr. Sidney Brown and Dr. Christ of
biology, radiation biology. They had a Cobalt 60
facility on campus, a very small source that I
remember as a graduate assistant, we had to
sometimes go over and do maintenance to that
facility. And they had a few animals in cages
there. But that was in one of the old army-type
buildings, barracks buildings, yeah. Is that
what you remember seeing? Yeah, that's the type of
building. It didn't look like one of the new
buildings. Building F or something over by what
was back behind the Indian Press at that time. And
they tore most of those buildings down. I still see
one over there. Did they bring most of that
research out here or something? once we yes
because we added to this center a special facility
for the radiation of animals it's not part of the
reactor building it's it's a separate building
that was built on our site and it housed a very large
cobalt 60 source and you could when you raise the
source for exposure there was a large field with a
dirt mound to catch the radiation you're not
using, the stray radiation. And you could place
small houses of animals out on the field. And you
can place them at varying distances from the
source and irradiate them. And we operated that
source for many years. No, the source has been
dismantled. The building is still there and the
shield is still there. When was it dismantled?
That's a good question.
Early 70s. When was it first opened? In, I'd say,
60...
Well, okay, it opened very close to the time we
opened. I'd say 63, 64. It was planned very early as
part of the Science Center to have a nuclear
reactor source, which is basically a neutron
source, and then to have the separate gamma
facility. for life science studies. The research
that was done in cooperation with MD Anderson, was
that done here or in Houston? Well, we've done
quite a bit of work for MD Anderson and still do. Are
you talking about the gold seeds? I haven't been
able to really understand exactly what kind, but I
knew there was radiation research. Oh yes, the MD
Anderson Tumor Institute. He's done a lot of
research at A&M, both at this reactor facility and
also the psychotropic. We have not been involved
with any where the patients come to us for any
treatment, any radiation treatment. What we're
producing here are isotopes that are implanted in
cancerous tumors. We produce the basic
radioactive material they use, which is gold.
It's a little tiny gold seed about the diameter of a
pencil lid, thin line pencil lid, roughly a tenth
of an inch in length. And it's platinum coated so
that it can be made surgically clean. And then we
produce the radioactivity in the little seed. And
we produce the quantity of activity they desire at
a certain time on a certain day for implant in the
patient. And we have to make obviously more
radioactivity than is needed because there's two
or three days in between for handling of the
material to get it shipped back down to Houston and
get it through their laboratory because they will
assay it for its strength to make sure that it's the
proper strength at the time of surgery. And we've
been doing that for many years, still doing it. Was
that process developed here? In the early stages
of that experimental work, it wasn't indeed an
experiment. It was experimental all the way, and
the patients, we were told, were terminal. And of
course, we never got involved with that end of it.
But now, this is standard therapy. But that
therapy was developed here? Yes, as a result of the
work we did. Of course, now when we speak with Dr.
Calhoun, maybe this is where you heard that story.
He was one of the founding fathers of this
facility, and then what, 20 years later or
whatever, 22, 20-so years later, he actually
benefited from the implants of the gold we make.
He's had these implants for treatment of cancer.
Do you plan to interview Dr. Kemp? I plan to, yes.
Well, he's a must. He's a must in your interview
because he will tie together all these dates we're
talking about on the Science Center and the
involvement of Dr. Wernherg. After Dr.
Mornerdi's initial involvement in the proposal
gathering, and the fund gathering rather, he then
became a primary researcher here at the facility.
He developed the Activation Analysis Research
Laboratory, called AARL as we knew it in those
days. That's been shut down. Well, it's been
transferred. The function has and renamed. It's
now the center trace characterization. It's part
of that center. But it's still neutron activation
analysis. There was a lot of activity there. They
were one of our mainstays in the early years here.
Their laboratory was part of our facility. They
occupied a very large facility. space in the
reactor, upper research level as we call it, where
their equipment was very close to the reactor. And
we've since improved the method of delivering
samples using high pressure gas. We call them
pneumatic systems. And that lab was later removed
from that area adjacent to the reactor. And when we
built this new lab addition right in here, We sent
the samples much longer distances. And the Center
for Trace Characterization still have a lab here,
always have had. That's an activity that we've
never been without, either under the name of
Activation Analysis Research Lab or CTC. Do you
know when that center started? Oh, the AARL? No,
the Center for... Oh, that? No. It
was set up to collect the activities of various
groups, put them under one collection, one
directionship, and that's now being done under
the Department of Chemistry. in the College of
Science. And Dr. Swiker is the director of that
center. Which were a very vital and essential
facility to that research. Because they have to
have the reactor to get the neutrons to do that
work. Besides the activation analysis, what was
going on at the Well, in the early days, we were
producing isotopes. There's always been an
interest in the Houston area. First in just
isotope production. These would be basically
commercial users.
The petrochemical companies have always shown
interest in the reactor. And then we have the
isotope suppliers that are supplying the
hospitals and industry in the Southwest on the
commercial side. We've been working with those
users out of Houston. But our main thrust in those
days was working, of course, with the university,
developing programs in the various departments,
biochemistry, chemistry, life sciences, animal
science. Some of our early experimenters, for
example, was Dr. Deeker, still with A&M. Maybe a
person you'd like to interview because I would say
he was part of the history of this science center.
He was around when we started and one of our earlier
experimenters. He ran a project here for many
years. looking at the uptake of minerals in
peanuts. We would irradiate his peanut samples.
He would analyze those samples for the minerals
that were present. He was developing nutritional
plant foods, I'd say, for the peanuts. Also, he was
trying to determine the processes by which this
plant was actually picking up the minerals. It led
to better fertilizers and also higher production
yields in the plant cycle.
All this being traced using radioactive
materials. Again, it's what we call the neutron
activation analysis.
Neutron activation analysis is a very important
part of of nuclear reactor research, the users of
these facilities. Even the small reactors, you
can provide this service. The little 201, for
example, on campus, you could do a small amount of
what we call the NAA on it, simply because neutrons
are present. Neutrons, when they enter a
substance, They interreact with the nuclei and in
that process the radioactivity is produced. Each
element that's present becomes radioactive. And
then it's up to the scientist to have the technique
and the skills to identify what he's made
radioactive. In doing so he can quantify what's in
the sample. That's really all we do. As well as If he
runs standards of known weights, known masses, he
can then compare the unknown sample to a known
sample and then determine the quantity of the
material that's present. So it's a full analysis
of the sample. You can do this by chemistry as well,
but there are some big advantages in many cases by
doing it with neutron, the neutron method rather
than the chemical method. Very good explanation.
Something I hadn't been able to figure out from the
technical publications. They assume you know
what it is. That's what it is. And then the other
work we got into in the early days was to work with
our beam ports, which are penetrations through
the reactor shield structure They're much like
large telescopes, the way they're fabricated
there. They start near the reactor with a small
diameter pipe, and then as you work your way
through the shield structure, these sections of
pipes get larger, which allows you to place
shielding material in the pipes and leave, say, a
tiny hole through the center. If you line the hole
up all the way through the port, you will get a beam
of radiation coming down the hole and you can shape
that beam have it large or you can have it very small
you can place materials in the beam and if you don't
want to look at what would be coming directly off
the reactor you can do what we call secondary
reactions
allow the neutrons to interact with the target and
then you indeed then look at that target through
the beam. Let whatever the secondary reactions
are come down the beam. And in the 60s and the years
prior to that, 40s, 50s, there was a lot of particle
physics
going on. These studies were being conducted at
research reactors.
Of course, the cyclotron or accelerators came
into being. That gave the scientists another tool
to work with. Again, you're involved with
radioactivity when you work with a cyclotron or an
accelerator. It's a different machine entirely
than a nuclear reactor. The scientist uses it for a
different reason. But our beam port work became
quite extensive. mid-60s all the way up through
early 70s. And then it seemed like so much of this
work was being done all over the world and in the
national laboratories, mainly here in the United
States, that it seemed like they reached a point
where they figured they'd studied most of the
major things. And the interest in particle
physics using a reactor kind of died away. And it
wasn't until a few years later that other uses were
found for extracting beams. Neutron
radiography, for example, is a very popular
common method now for use of a neutron beam to image
an object by measuring the transmission of
neutrons through that object. and obtaining the
image on the film, much like an x-ray would be done,
except the nuclear particle you're dealing with
is much different, and it interreacts with matter
in a much different way than the x-ray would.
Research reactors of, say, our size, definitely
are good tools for neutron radioactivity. We have
such a facility now. These are good facilities for
measuring
defects in materials, metal castings, looking at
plastic laminates that have been bonded by
special glues or bonding agents. And if the
bonding agents contain moisture, then the
bonding is probably going to fail. So you can look
at these materials and determine if you have a good
bond. And it's very, very good for looking at
plastic explosives. Small detonator devices
like you would find in the ejector seats of
military aircraft. Also there's a lot of small
explosives in the control systems of some
aircraft. They're computer controlled And if you
can't control the computer, if it goes completely
on the whack, well, sometimes they will release
control by explosive methods. Just release the
control wire by a small explosion.
We do that type of work. We do some of that for NASA
and their missile program. And then Bell
Helicopter, looking at some of the blades. Not the
final product, but the laboratory development
research area in their blade work. Because
they're trying to make helicopter blades as light
as they possibly can. The plastics offer a much
lighter blade. And as I understand, an actually
stronger blade. When you can put it together by
gluing it in a series of layers. Put it together. So
the beam port work, we had involvement of the
nuclear physicist, the nuclear engineer.
They're the types that would be looking at
particle reactions.
These were all titled either something like
Resonance Fluorescence Studies,
which is excitation of energy levels in
materials. and neutron diffraction. These were
all kind of carryovers of what was going on in the
national laboratories.
When all this nuclear business began,
particularly for peaceful uses, we needed to know
quite a bit of information about our isotopes.
What are their half-lives? What are the gamma ray
energies that come off of these materials? once
they're made radioactive? How many identifiable
isotopes do you have for each element? How do they
naturally occur in nature? And so forth and so on.
So there's quite a bit of work being done in the 40s
and 50s in the development of what we call the chart
of the nuclei.
Texas A&M was not heavily involved in that. But it
led to the type of people that came to A&M. You would
find professors that were working in these labs,
the national laboratories, that would come to A&M
to join the staff, the faculty. And in fact,
there's still some of those individuals here. Dr.
John McIntyre works with cyclotron. He was an
extensive researcher here in particle physics
studies. using our beam ports. And he had nuclear
engineering students studying under him,
physics students.
Quite interesting. He's now with Cyclotron. What
is their connection at all between Cyclotron and
the university? There's no administrative
connection, nor is there a connection as far as
changing their customers or users, say. They're
completely different machines used for
different purposes. Now you can, you will
probably find a researcher that may be interested
in using both. That happens. His experiment may be
such that he can do particular things at each place
and that may be a possible requirement.
Yeah,
we use the fission process, which is of course the
first development. Fusion development, we do not
become involved in fusion because it's right now
experimental. It's in the development stage. But
the large power reactors, hopefully one day will
be fusion.
If you have a cleaner system with byproducts, the
problems there go way down with fusion. We have an
infinite supply of energy. That's the source for
fusion. It's infinite. The heavy waters, the
hydrogen, there's plenty of that.
It would be nice to achieve fusion, but the problem
with it is the temperatures are so high in the
reactive process that there's nothing man-made
that will hold those temperatures. So you have to
do it in a very sophisticated electromagnetic
field. And the magnetic fields are very difficult
to shape just perfectly. to hold what we call the
plasma. And it breaks down, and it doesn't last
very long. That's the achievements of, of course,
producing fusion. We know that because we've seen
fusion in our weapons. But the peaceful use of it,
developing it like we were able to get into the
peaceful uses of our reactors using fission, It's
a much more difficult problem. It's going to take
many years to get there. Does A&M plan on getting
involved in the development? A&M has had some
involvement. It's been on a small scale, either in
the individual interest in the physics
department in that area or individual interest,
say, in the nuclear engineering aspect of it. as
well as the electrical engineer. He enters into
this picture too. Most of it is being, I'd say,
developed by the physicist. Once the physicist
has his theories all laid out and then he needs the
engineer to come in and put it, have him put it
together and get something that's functional.
That's where they are now. They're, the two groups
are working together, or the two disciplines are
working together hopefully achieve a continuous
fusion reaction and produce
energy. From what I understand, I want to make a
statement. You tell me if I'm right or wrong. The
nuclear reactivant here is used more as a tool for
the study of the effects or a tool in the study of
something else using radiation. rather than
doing nuclear science research? We do two things.
The majority of our work is we produce radioactive
materials. We take a material that is not
radioactive and we introduce it to the reactor, to
the neutrons that are present, and then we then
have a radioactive material. And you sell it? We
don't sell it. We're just providing it to the
experimenter. We're a service facility. No,
we're not out saying that we've got all these
materials on the shelf and you can buy them. It's
not that at all. We are here to serve the
experimenter. And he will contact us. And in many
cases, he has an idea. That's all it is. He isn't
familiar with working with radiation. But in
reading material, he's questioned if he could do a
certain project using a radioactive material,
maybe a tracer. Quite simply, describing a tracer
would be the work being done in the animal science
area by Dr. Ellis, where he's studying the
digestive tract and also other things related to
that in cattle. He extracts samples from the
animal's stomach or multiple stomachs as they
have. And he will actually be tracing a material as
it passes through the digestive tract of the
animal. And he will determine the use of that
material by the animal in its nutritional uptake.
And he's doing that by not feeding the animal
anything that's radioactive. But he's putting a
material in there that the reactor will make
radioactive very easily and easily
identifiable. He puts a rare earth in there that is
not commonly occurring. It's something foreign
to the animal. You wouldn't see it in any other
animal except the one that he's given that special
feed to. And then as he extracts the samples, we
activate. that material in the reactor. He then
will count the sample and he can identify the
uptake or how much is being moved through the
animal. That's called the tracer method. Another
common tracer radioactive-wise is the medical
application. Tracing of iodine to the thyroid for
a scan.
It's gotten to the point now where almost any of us
that go to a doctor, we're gonna become involved
with some radioactivity. Either x-ray or they're
gonna do a scan maybe. Study the digestive tract.
The heart, they can take brain scans, thyroid
scans. Technetium is a very good isotope. for
human diagnostic work. We make technetium here
for the medical applications. So the reason all
this works is this material that is not
radioactive, you place it in the reactor, it comes
out of the reactor radioactive, but chemically
it's still going to behave the same. You put table
salt, for example, in the reactor, you're going to
get out radioactive sodium and radioactive
chlorine. But it's still going to react with
sodium chloride in any chemical reaction you want
to involve it in. And there's where the scientist
can really use his imagination and put that to some
use. So most of what you produce is used... In
research. A&M research and such? These materials
are used in research not only at A&M but in the
medical fields and in industrial research.
We're not necessarily serving the industrial
side where they're selling a product. 90% or more
of what we do for our commercial or industrial
people is research. Materials are processes that
will be the benefit of mankind.
If you get a better product in the end, that's what
we're after in serving these people. You said
there were two basic things you did. Okay, that's
the function of the reactor where you produce
radioactivity in materials. That's called
activation. If you're going to produce a given
material, then that would be called isotope
production of the other reactor. The other use of
the reactor is the extraction of the radiation
that it gives off.
You're not necessarily producing the
radioactive material anymore. You're tailoring
a particular series of radiation particles that
come off the reactor. In the nuclear reactor,
provides you with a complete span of energies, of
neutrons and gamma rays. It's called the spectra.
And the experimenter, in many cases, will place
materials in the beam ports. And he will block out
certain energies of radiation particles he
doesn't want. Or he'll put something in there that
scatters them away. And he's left with the energy
and the particle of interest. That's quite clever
and requires sometimes a lot of hard work to get
that done, but it can be done. Because the nuclear
reactor, the fission process, gives you this wide
range of energies to work with. Whereas the
accelerator, will give you what we call the mono
energetic energy the single energy and based upon
the target that you choose for the high velocity
for the accelerated particles it gets its name as
an accelerator because it's taking charged
particles charged nuclei and increasing their
speeds to very high velocities bringing them up to
those high speeds and then letting those
high-speed particles strike a target. And in the
reaction in that target, you will get a secondary
radiation particle coming out that the
experimenter uses. But in most cases, that
secondary that comes out of there from the
particle being striking is usually a one energy.
It doesn't have this broad... energy range of
particles that we produce. Most, almost all of our
experimenters, though, are interested in the
thermal, what we call the low energy neutron. So
when you think about research reactors, you
always think of neutrons as being the primary
radioactivity
or radioactive particle. or inducement of
radioactivity that you deal with. Now, we have
gamma rays. We can expose large systems or small
samples all the way up to atoms that are 3, 4 feet
across and 4, 5 feet high. We can expose those to
gamma rays and neutrons, and we can actually mix
the two. We have a large exposure for that kind of
work. Has the neutron
probably once been true ever since the center's
been in existence? Oh, yes, because that's the
main product of the reactor, sure. Yeah, that
would be the interest of the engineer and the
scientist to ever build it in the first place, is to
have something such as a nuclear reactor that will
produce neutrons. And once you have the neutrons,
you can then start producing radioactive
materials. You had those two different functions
of the nuclear reactor, and you had the exposure
area. Isotope production.